---
layout: post
title:  "Booting Virtual Machines on Grid'5000 using Vagrant"
date:   2016-09-19 10:30:00
categories:
---

# Rationale

On the [platform](https://www.grid5000.fr), having a customized environment is
usually provided by the [Kadepoy3](http://kadeploy3.gforge.inria.fr/) tool. It
provides bare-metal provisionning of a limited number of Linux distributions
(including Debian, Ubuntu) that can be adapted to the user need.

Some time ago, booting virtual machines in the production environment has been
enabled.

* It's fast : we just need to get a job from the scheduler and run a
*kvm* process inside. Usually few seconds are required to have a virtual
machine ready.
* It's flexible : theorically *any* virtual machine can be
used.

In addition to that, a ceph cluster is now available.  This can be used to
store virtual machine images.

# Vagrant-g5k

[Vagrant-g5k](https://github.com/msimonin/vagrant-g5k) is a plugin for vagrant
to easily deploy virtual machines on Grid'5000.  From a high level point of
view, each *kvm* process is run on a physical node after being scheduled by
[OAR](https://oar.imag.fr/).

The plugin is far from perfect : ideas, contribution are very welcome. Let's
take a look to its main features. An example of Vagrantfile can be found
[here](https://github.com/msimonin/vagrant-g5k/blob/master/Vagrantfile).

# Disk image

The virtual machine uses a base disk image that can be back by the frontend
filesystem or by a RBD stored in the Ceph cluster. The plugin exposes different
strategies to manage the disk : 

* `copy` : will copy the disk to a dedicated location. The copy will be created
in your home directory on the frontend or in the same pool as the original
image.
This mimics the behaviour of vagrant which imports the base box in the
*.vagrant* directory of your project.
* `cow` : will create a Copy On Write clone of the base image. The original
 image will be used in read-only mode.
*  `snapshot` : will create an ephemeral
 Copy On Write clone of the base image.
*  `direct` : will use the base image in
read-write mode. 

# Network

In the current implementation, network traffic from the virtual machine is
NATed to the outside world. Inter virtual machines SSH communication could be added
in a near future using Grid'5000 subnets. Ports can be forwarded from the
virtual machine to its host machine. `vagrant ssh` command tunnels
automatically SSH communication from your local machine to the virtual machine. 

# Job / virtual machine

The plugin is build based on the idea that one virtual machine correspond to
one OAR job. `vagrant up` will submit a job to the platform. When the job is
ready it will execute the kvm process. `vagrant halt` will delete the job.
Termination signals is trapped to gracefully shutdown the virtual machine. 
`vagrant destroy` will additionally destroy the virtual machine disk image.

Currently a whole node is reserved and the virtual machine CPU/RAM is set to
the maximum available. In the future a virtual machine resource demand could be
map to a more complex resource selection to let the scheduler assign them.

# Wish list

* Automatic port forwarding to your local machine is appealing. Except for SSH,
you still need to create manually a tunnel from your local machine and the
physical host (ports are forwarded from the physical host to the virtual machine by kvm)

* Support for parallel operation. The thread safety of the current
implementation is questionnable.  Adding this we should be able to start a mass
of virtual machines and manage them with Vagrant. 

* Support for CPU/RAM customization.

* Support for inter virtual machines communication

* Improve code quality - be more idiomatic.

# Thanks

[pmorillon](https://pmorillon.github.io/) for (among other things) maintaining
the Ceph cluster, and providing inputs to this project (especially the wrapper
script around kvm)
